---
layout: post
title: ron paul for president
---

I just happened to catch the Republican debate on CNN, and it inspired me to jot down some thoughts on politics.

I've always hated politics. I understand it is a necessary part of society, but for a country the size of the United States, it turns into this complex and corrupt game that bears little resemblance to the idea of democracy. Whenever I see politicians campaigning, I have a hard time taking any of them seriously. Everything about them seems fake to me. They are in a difficult position though. They need to win votes, but there are far more dumb voters in this country than intelligent ones. So in putting on a show for the dumb voters, they often appear dumb themselves. This kind of thing totally turns me off to the political process.

[Ron Paul][1] is the only politician I've personally seen that doesn't seem fake, which is why he stands out so much from everyone else whether you like him or not. He's just a smart, honest guy that speaks his mind without worrying about how it will be perceived. This is shocking to people who are used to all the political rhetoric, but to me, it makes him the only candidate with any credibility. Almost every other politician plays to the audience and eventually gets caught flipping on an issue, but this never happens with RP. You can tell he's put a lot of thought into his ideals, and he's remarkably consistent. He doesn't play political games and won't compromise on his beliefs just to win. Sadly, that is the reason he will probably never be president, not to mention the blatant [media bias][2]. It's a damn shame because he is by far the most intelligent person in this debate.

[1]: http://www.ronpaul2012.com/
[2]: http://www.thedailyshow.com/watch/mon-august-15-2011/indecision-2012---corn-polled-edition---ron-paul---the-top-tier
